README.md, before:

# EcoState

[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/badge/documentation-EcoState-orange.svg?colorB=E91E63)](https://james-thorson-noaa.github.io/ecostate/)

Package _EcoState_ fits a state-space mass-balance model intended for aquatic ecosystems, using mass-balance equations matching those from Ecopath and dynamical equations matching Ecosim.  Unlike Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE), EcoState fits both biological parameters (e.g., equilibrium biomass and predator-prey vulnerability) and measurement parameters (e.g., catchability coefficients) via fit to time-series data.  EcoState also estimates additional process errors representing nonstationarity in growth efficiency, ecotrophic efficient, migration, or other unmodeled processes.  These process errors allow biomass patterns to closely match available data, so that resulting consumption (and associated productivity and mortality rates) can accurately be conditioned upon any residual patterns.     

## Installation

EcoState can be installed from GitHub using:

``` r
library(remotes)
install_github( "James-Thorson-NOAA/EcoState" )
```

Or to access vignettes from your R session, please instead use:

``` r
remotes::install_github( "James-Thorson-NOAA/EcoState",
                          build_vignettes = TRUE )
browseVignettes("EcoState")
```

# More details 

For more background please read:

Thorson, J.  Kristensen, K., Aydin, K., Gaichas, S., Kimmel, D.G., McHuron, E.A., Nielsen, J.N., Townsend, H., Whitehouse, G.A. EcoState:  Extending Ecopath with Ecosim to estimate biological parameters and process errors using RTMB and time-series data.  Pre-print URL: https://doi.org/10.32942/X2QK81

Commit message:

Accepted version (#9)
* Update DESCRIPTION

* Update CITATION

* Create stanzas.R

* Update stanzas.R

* updates

* updates

* updates

* initial version

* Update stanzas.R

* Update ecostate.R

* add stanza examples to vignettes

* simplify code

* small additions to output

* fix indexing error in t2_a

* add `convert_rpath`

* simplify a rowSum of elemprod

* simplify add_equilibrium

* eliminate another rowsum of elemprod

* experiments: code compatible with sparse-matrices

* add commented-out code for sparse-matrix diet

* add fits to age-comp data

* add option to estimate SpawnX_g2

* small updates

* add new vignette and option to fit age-comps

* fixes for penalized likelihood version

* Fix issues in stanzas when out of equilibrium

* update docs

* adding interface to include priors

* update how comps are calculated

* add additional reporting

* add ability to deal with missing data

* simplify and generalize stanza code

* switch to log(abundance-at-age) ...

... and additional derived quantities to track

* fix fecundity

* improve interface for derived quantities

* Update compute_nll.R

* fix small stuff for biomass-dynamics case study

* add fit_QB arg and generalize log_prior arg

* merge main-release into dev (#8)

* Update README.md

* Update README.md

* Update README.md

* Update README.md

* Update DESCRIPTION

---------

Co-authored-by: Jim Thorson <James.T.Thorson@gmail.com>

* small fixes to vignettes

* fixes for R_CMD_CHECK

* Update README.md

* continue to update docs

* Update .gitignore

---------

Co-authored-by: Jim Thorson <James.T.Thorson@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# EcoState

[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/badge/documentation-ecostate-orange.svg?colorB=E91E63)](https://james-thorson-noaa.github.io/ecostate/)

Package _ecostate_ fits a state-space mass-balance model _EcoState_ intended for aquatic ecosystems, using mass-balance equations matching those from Ecopath and dynamical equations matching Ecosim.  Unlike the Ecopath-with-Ecosim (_EwE_) package, _ecostate_ fits both biological parameters (e.g., equilibrium biomass and predator-prey vulnerability) and measurement parameters (e.g., catchability coefficients) via fit to time-series data.  _ecostate_ also estimates additional process errors representing nonstationarity in growth efficiency, ecotrophic efficient, migration, or other unmodeled processes.  These process errors allow biomass patterns to closely match available data, so that resulting consumption (and associated productivity and mortality rates) can accurately be conditioned upon any residual patterns.     

## Installation

_ecostate_ can be installed from GitHub using:

``` r
library(remotes)
install_github( "James-Thorson-NOAA/ecostate" )
```

Or to access vignettes from your R session, please instead use:

``` r
remotes::install_github( "James-Thorson-NOAA/ecostate",
                          build_vignettes = TRUE )
browseVignettes("ecostate")
```

# More details 

For more background please read:

Thorson, J.  Kristensen, K., Aydin, K., Gaichas, S., Kimmel, D.G., McHuron, E.A., Nielsen, J.N., Townsend, H., Whitehouse, G.A. EcoState:  Extending Ecopath with Ecosim to estimate biological parameters and process errors using RTMB and time-series data.  Pre-print URL: https://doi.org/10.32942/X2QK81 

or the updated version:

Thorson, J.  Kristensen, K., Aydin, K., Gaichas, S., Kimmel, D.G., McHuron, E.A., Nielsen, J.N., Townsend, H., Whitehouse, G.A. (In press) The benefits of hierarchical ecosystem models: demonstration using a new state-space mass-balance model EcoState.  Fish and Fisheries.
